uh the context for this is
how i got this gray hair
uh and
i have come in after three different
founding teams sort of series b
time frame
and the context for this conversation is
what did i find
and what did we have to do to get the
companies all three of them
have gone public
and have become multi-hundred million
dollar businesses multi-billion dollars
in value
and uh so that's what this this
conversation is about uh today
um
the last uh the company i'm at now uh
digital ocean we took public early this
year several hundred million dollars in
revenue
and uh prior to that i was at sendgrid
uh which uh we took public and then sold
it to twilio
uh the lessons learned here sort of come
into four buckets
they're around process
they're around prioritization and
clarity
they're around capital is permanent
and it's really about the team
and um uh these are sort of the same
patterns that i've seen
uh and i wondered you know i started
over 20 years ago i was an investment
banker covering tech companies
and it was a familiar theme where the
vcs would love the company and all of a
sudden they wouldn't love a company and
they would ask us these 50 to 100
million dollar revenue businesses to
sell them and i was always like wow why
it seems like a good company it's
growing 25 percent
and
the product's working why why did the
vcs throw their hands up
and uh then i joined this company
digital globe which happened to be 50
million dollars silver the series b
stage
and uh this is why what i found and why
this vcs throw their hands up and the
difference between
them sort of giving up and putting more
money in and getting to the potential of
the company is is sort of centered
around these key themes again
prioritization and process
you know cap structure matters and and
the team
so first you know uh when i've come in
to these businesses
and the gray hair comes in to a founding
founders startup and there's a lot of
chaos
and everybody's proud of the chaos
because it's all about the chaos that's
allowing you to have an exhilarating
time and raise capital etc
and then there is a point in time when
you get to 150 people
where you actually need more process you
can't the weight of the organization
will start to bog down so it's actually
your friend
it's not a foe
and when you think about
adding process both in terms of the
vertical markets marketing product
engineering
and then how they work
cross-functionally
if you don't formalize the process and i
know in the early stages of a business
there's this creative energy
where there is no process and
everybody's very excited about that
and that starts to break down as you get
bigger
and the practical reality is if the
process at some point does not exceed
the rate of change in the business
the burn rate is going to go up the
growth rate for revenue is going to go
down
it's just an axiom it will happen
and um
and so uh there's a lot of complicating
factors for that so this is a chart
that when we did our first off-site at
sendgrid we stole uh some graphics from
a harvard business school case study but
it talked about providing clarity and
creating process and alignment
and what i've found in the businesses
that i've come in is everybody these
arrows are meant to be the people in the
company
the activity in the company is going in
all sorts of different directions
chasing customers
and
the problem with that is that works when
it's five people around the ping pong
table and the computer terminal writing
code
and when you get to 50 people 100 people
this starts to break down
because you can't all keep on the same
page
and you can't possibly all be aligned in
terms of what you're doing be aligned
cross-functionally
turns out a lot of you are dependent
upon each other and as you more and more
people you get
without process
it makes it very difficult to actually
grow and scale the company
it's math i haven't written the theories
on it but uh it's very very uh
consistent in terms of the patterns
and i think it's really important that
everybody appreciate it is at some point
you got to get the arrows going in the
same direction and you need fewer arrows
arrows being initiatives act activities
etc you have to start to narrow down
what you do
and focus it and focus people in the
same direction
so the things that make you successful
to get product market fit
and get the ball rolling and that first
million dollars of revenue and the first
few customers and the first 10 million
actually are going to be the enemy
as you
get to series b
get the 30 million 40 million 50 million
dollars in revenue 100 plus people in
the company if you do not organize
people in a more uh organized fashion
systematic fashion it will break down
um and you know i know people will say
well yancey so what we get paid to have
a super high burn rate
as long as we can grow really fast
and that's true until it's not
and
you know the capital markets over a
hundred years don't reward people for
that they certainly have in the last 20
so you know we could continue to be
wrong
but
my perspective on it is prioritizing and
using process
actually is a way to um
to
to drive better execution
so generating cash isn't a bad thing and
the reality is if you don't create
process that outpaces the rate of change
of the business
customers employees etc you're going to
burn more money and we'll talk about
that in a second it has very real cost
to leadership people going out and
raising capital dilution on equity more
voices and more opinions in the
boardroom
on what you should be doing so that's
real very real cost and it's not um it's
not always necessary
the second thing uh to think about is it
does become more complex
and
you know the more employees when you go
from two founders three founders five
people 10 people 100 people
just more human beings in the same room
it's just more complex you get from one
customer to hundreds of customers
that's another layer of complexity one
investor
a dozen investors
more complexity and those are all the
three uh people that you have to
triangulate between customers employees
uh and your investors
and uh
it's really really important to provide
clarity so related to
uh prioritization our
process
is prioritization
it's sort of a four-letter word people
hate it every time i've come into a
company people
yancy you have no vision you're all
about the money and cash flow and
yeah kind of
a little bit but the reality is
you need clarity for employees the other
thing we see
in
in these in these companies that are are
challenged
is a lot of things that you know look at
employee engagement surveys and what do
employees talk about they have no career
direction there's too many priorities
they don't know what's important they
don't know how to have a career at the
company there's too much chaos people
say that very openly and they're looking
for some clarity it's incumbent
on people to provide clarity and i know
they don't ring a bell when you have
product market fit
they don't ring a bell when the company
could get to a billion dollars in
revenue but you have to start changing
your behavior as if you're going to get
there
uh or you won't because of what we
talked about earlier in terms of the
chaos and so it's really really
important i know this is very difficult
we've just come through two years at the
last company where we come in two years
ago and start talking about doing fewer
things and people go crazy
like we can't do fear things all these
things are important and the reality is
the leadership of a company has to
determine well everything is not
important
and so you have to tell what is
and more importantly
what is not important
what are we not going to do and you know
what so what
and again when you get product market
fit you got real revenue real customers
you're not going anywhere
but the only way to sustain that
trajectory is to start acting
differently acting like
you know and i recommend to people take
a day off
take two days off and say forget about
next quarter next year
if we're successful on the trajectory we
want to be on
in 18 months or two years what will this
look like
and what are the things that we're doing
now that are going to break and fall
down completely on their face
if we don't change
and what i will guarantee you
is that will help
clarify what is important now
if you only focus on this quarter next
quarter my annual plan
getting through the next 12 months
you will never optimize a business that
should be around for a really real you
didn't found a business to be around for
next quarter
and if you really have a vision for what
this looks like in five ten years you
have to start acting like that
you know at a point when you have
product market fit so it's really
important to focus on narrow things the
other thing i would say is when you have
that first product and it's taking off
customer feedback's good
you know there's always this temptation
to go build products six seven eight
nine ten
and
what's very fascinating about software
companies
and you could look at the largest
software companies on the planet that
are headquartered right down the street
from here
how much of their revenue
comes from product a
and how much money and chaos that they
still have
decades later focusing on all these
other products that produce less than
five percent of revenue it's very it's
fascinating but that's the real pattern
it's very it's very unusual to build
product two three there are some
incredible companies who have done that
but the reality is you look at that
initial product and how do you make it
better how do you scale it how do you
diversify channels all the different
things and optimize that and then be
very thoughtful about adding new things
that you're selling into the market just
because you were a genius about this
initial idea
doesn't mean uh product two three four
five are gonna have the same traction
and the minute you start introducing
multiple products
multiple channels the complexity goes
through the roof so you better be very
have a ton of conviction you have
a ton of feedback from customers saying
that's the right thing to do because it
really changes the organization to say i
have built the whole energy
and ecosystem and workflow of the
company around x and then i'm going to
go add y
it's very difficult sounds easy to do
it's very difficult to do so be very
thoughtful about that
the third thing is around capital and
we're in silicon valley here people are
throwing money at every startup
i get it so it seems like capital's free
and
it probably is right it's uh it's really
cheap
the reality is
you know
the dollars you're raising are permanent
dollars
and
um
all these things around efficiency
and prioritization
on the math side of it are correlated to
burn rate when you're losing money
and so if you're going to go out and
raise money
the sooner you get efficient
the less money you're going to raise
the fewer voices you're going to have in
the board
fewer investors who are going to have
points of view on what you should do
the more control you're going to have
on your vision in executing the vision
and so waiting longer to do this to
series c to series d
you can do that
right there's ample evidence the data's
un you know undeniable that there's a
lot of money
out in the capital markets today for for
great technology companies
the problem is the longer you go into
the capital structure raising money
before you make money
a weird thing happens in terms of your
investors
you
you get to this point where your vcs
are on the other side of the uh time
horizon from you
right so you're building a company for
the very long term
and they have 10-year money they
probably started five years into their
fund
so they they're heading for the exits in
five years and so if you're
delayed
in terms of growth
rates etc and
having the opportunity to create this
liquidity event
you know you have more people in the
boardroom who are at odds with each
other later money cares more about the
next five years than the people who were
there eight years ago they could care
less about the next five years and
that's a very real tension
on the on the uh on the founding team on
the executive team and so
you know if you can push out raising
capital and again you want to make sure
you're over capitalized early so you can
hit your milestones and get product
market fit but once you have that
by prioritizing and creating process
you're going to be more efficient with
every incremental dollar that's just
going to accrue to the benefit of every
current employee
current investor
and it's going to
simplify how you execute in the future
and you have to remember you're on very
very different time frames
uh as you get into year one year two
year three you know this most recent
company that i've been a part of we went
public very early because of this issue
so it's really important for people to
think about this
the last point i would make is
especially the longer you get in you
know the vcs put a lot of money in they
always want to be on the board and they
have every right to be
i would advise you to make sure that
you've had operators on the board people
who have done what you're trying to do
from dollar one dollar fifty million of
revenue to several hundred million
dollars of revenue because of all the
things that we're talking about putting
in process prioritization
uh managing talent managing multiple
products managing multiple channels
managing vcs investors you need people
who have actually done that
and not who have a lot of there's a lot
of great incredible vcs they have great
benchmarks they're very helpful
with recruiting and you know advising
you on on different stages of the
business but
they're coming at it from a financial
lens and a lot of these decisions you
make are not financial they're about
people they're about customers and uh
and they're hard
they're not easy
and having somebody on your board a
coach a mentor somebody who's helping
you formally
to think through those issues from a
lens of i've done this
and i know what it takes to get from 50
to 100 to 150 200 million in revenue
it's very different than somebody who's
just been on 19 boards and seen 18 ipos
very fundamentally different because of
the day-to-day
job that's involved in that
the last piece i talk about is probably
the most sensitive
again i've come in
to three different situations over the
last 20 years
after the founders
so all the things that i i've inherited
we've talked about
and uh
this is one that's unmistakable i was
just having a
lunch
with a vc uh back company ceo founder in
uh colorado just the other day on this
well this whole talk
but um but this topic in in particular
and this is about
you know
the team
and
um you know i get it right your founder
your two founders your three founders
it's your idea
it's your force of will
that got the product
into customers hands
they got the first dollars from vcs it
recruited all these people to come to
the company
and it is about you
and there's no question about every
organization
as it scales it's about the team
it's about the people you recruit the
leaders you put in place
and
that's a very weird line to cross
you know my son was asking me about this
before we went public a few months ago
he's like daddy why don't you start a
company then you could be the only
shareholder not to deal with these vc
types
and i said you know oscar i'm not a
founder i come in after the founders
so i get this this is a very sensitive
topic
because the identity is the company
you founded it that's why they use the
word founder it's your baby
and the problem is is you diversify the
talent in the organization
it has to become about the organization
and so knowing when
to diversify the skill sets on your
executive team
right when you're the founder and it's
five of you or 10 of you or 20 of you
you can have 80 jobs they can all report
to you
you can make every single major decision
in the company for years
and
as you get to hundreds of people
and if you don't hire leaders who could
actually work with you on strategy and
execute your strategy and you have
confidence and you and you can delegate
that decision making if you can't do
that all the other things that we talked
about earlier
are impossible
because they go through you
and this is very difficult for people i
understand it i've seen it
but it's vitally important it can't be
about you it's got to be about that team
and hiring a really strong team
who can execute
if you don't do that you can hire
people who have a title and they still
take your direction you're not really
changing the game you might be making
the vcs happy that you hired a cmo
or a cto or chief product officer but if
you actually don't delegate to them and
have them execute the strategy and they
have them build a team
it's going to get bogged down the growth
rate will slow
and the burn rate will go up
so it's really important to diversify
the skill set
you know of the team so
in summary
process is
good um i know that
depending upon where you all are in in
the stage of the company life you're
going to say absolutely not we want no
process we want the chaos creative
energy i get it
um
increasing complexity
requires it's a mandate
that you provide clarity
you have to do it
um
you know focusing on the long term
from a business perspective is really
important
but it also from any number of reasons
not the least of which is be efficient
with capital just because capital is
easy to raise doesn't mean you should
always raise every dollar of capital
just to subsidize a very high burn rate
you can control the burn rate at some
point and again this isn't day one this
is certainly when you're in the 10 20 30
million dollars of revenue uh you have
to start thinking about what's this
going to look like when it's 100 or 150
million dollars in revenue and i
guarantee you
you'll think differently about what's
important now
if you think out two three years
because the things are gonna
break down whether it's on the talent
side the product side the tech stack the
go to market whatever it is
have to be addressed now
and the urgent things that you think are
urgent now
are going to be a little less urgent uh
in the context of some of the broader
things that are coming up in the next
year and it doesn't take long for a year
and a half two years when you're growing
so quickly so really be thoughtful about
capital
and you raise capital when you need it
and when you when you want it and when
it's available so there's that aspect of
it too when the cookie jar comes around
and there's dollars in it you put your
hand in it but at the same time you
don't want cheap capital to subsidize a
burn rate that you can control
really important and then the last is
you have to diversify the leadership
team and you have to know when to
diversify the leadership team nobody's
going to tell you when
i was talking with someone the other day
and i said
put a list together
what needs to be done with your exec
team
and go through each item on the list and
assign
that
whatever it is to somebody on the team
and if you can't get through that task
list
initiative list whatever it is with your
name not being on it
you're not diversified enough right
you're doing things your job as a ceo
isn't to do anything other than have the
right strategy and the right team and
enough money in the bank to execute the
strategy that's your job worry about
brand and worry about culture
and
it's not to do a lot of the things that
you might have had to do day one or day
365 or
or you know year two year three etc that
has to start changing and if you don't
have the team that can execute the
initiatives and you have to do it
then and uh and your 30 40 50 million
dollar revenue business
chances are
that um
there's not enough process there's not
enough prioritization and clarity
and um you know you're going to be
challenged to to build and scale the
business
[Music]
you